**Thermal plasticity changes competitive ability across a woodland salamander hybrid system.**

Emmy James and Martha Muñoz

Temperature mediates performance in ectotherms, affecting their ability to grow, survive, and reproduce. Aggression and evasion are key examples of thermally dependent behaviors that can impact fitness. However, we know little about how the thermal plasticity of such behaviors varies among close relatives and impacts competitive outcomes. Woodland salamanders (Genus: Plethodon) from the Appalachian Mountains are distributed across wide thermal gradients. These lungless salamanders compete for space and develop hybrid zones where territories overlap among species. Plethodontids tend to exhibit increased aggression at warmer temperatures, suggesting that as temperatures rise, behavioral interactions may be altered in ways that impact hybrid zone dynamics. It is thus far unclear, however, how salamander hybrids, which may encroach on their parent populations and drive competitive exclusion, respond behaviorally to warming. 

Here, we used staged bouts to examine the effects of temperature on aggression and evasion in the Plethodon shermani and Plethodon teyahalee hybrid system from the southern Appalachians. The behavior of salamanders from parent populations, particularly Plethodon shermani, appears to be more plastic to thermal changes than that of hybrid individuals. Our results suggest that rising temperatures may increase competition for preferable microhabitats, but the effects on behavior among parental and hybrid salamanders will be asymmetric. Temperature may therefore alter the outcomes of competition, determining which populations can persist under rapid warming.
